---
title: "Co-design research Two: Accessibility Barriers and Regulatory Approaches
  for Digital Technologies"
permalink: /initiative/rtdd-cd-2/
author: Caren Watkins
date: 2024-09-09T15:07:40.558Z
picture: /uploads/rtdd_colour_small-type_eng.svg
excerpt: "Between April and May 2024, the RtDD team worked with other community
  co-researchers with lived experience of disability to address all six project
  challenges. The research approach used online synchronous and asynchronous
  activities. "
---
Between April and May 2024, the RtDD team worked with community co-researchers with lived experience of disability to address all six project challenges. The research approach used online synchronous and asynchronous activities. The method 1-2-4-All was used for synchronous activities and the Canvas platform for asynchronous activities. The questions used to engage co-researchers in conversations about all six challenges are: 

1. What specific problems have you faced using digital tools or systems like computers, things with screens & buttons or apps on phone?
2. Think about new technologies or apps that didn’t work well for you. What rules should have been in place to make them more accessible?
3. Can you see any problems with rules to make things accessible that don’t say how to do it?

The approach of a 1-2-4-All format is to start activities with small groups and increase the group size gradually until everyone is together, building out thinking and ideas as the group grows. For this co-design we start by asking co-researchers to think about the three questions individually and document their thoughts on Canvas. We then met synchronously on Zoom and in Zoom breakout rooms for co-researchers to share their thoughts in pairs, groups of four and finally all together in one group. During the synchronous sessions facilitators took notes to capture new information and evolving ideas. The IDRC team then summarized the content generated by the co-researchers on Canvas and during the synchronous sessions and looped co-researchers back into the process to review the summarized information. The summarized information was uploaded to Canvas and organized in groups based on each prompt question. Co-researchers were asked if their “perspective is included and if it is accurately represented in the summaries. If it is not, then let us know in the response areas what you think should change or be added”.

[Co-design research One: The Standards Development Game](https://wecount.inclusivedesign.ca/initiatives/rtdd-cd-1/)
