---
title: "“All About Us”: Indigenous Data Analysis Workshop — Capacity Building in the Canadian Alliance for Healthy Hearts and Minds First Nations Cohort"
focus: "Data Science Education"
source: "Canadian Journal of Cardiology"
readability: ["Expert"]
type: "PDF Article"
openSource: false
sharePointUrl: "https://ocaduniversity.sharepoint.com/teams/Team_WeCount/Shared%20Documents/Resources%20and%20Tools/Literature%20(curated)/All%20about%20us_Indigenous%20Data%20Analysis%20Workshop.pdf"
keywords: []
learnTags: ["basicAI","inclusivePractice"]
summary: "This article describes a three-day workshop with university researchers and several First Nation communities to increase the capacity for data management and analysis by those communities. "
---
Research collaborations between non-Indigenous andIndigenous researchers primarily have been led by non-Indigenousresearchers with privileged locations in university settings. Recognitionof the importance of data sovereignty and control to enable Indigenousself-determination requires building data management and analysiscapacities among Indigenous research partners. The Canadian Alliancefor Healthy Hearts and Minds First Nations (CAHHM-FN) cohort study, acollaboration of 8 First Nations and researchers at 8 universities,convened a 3-day data management and analysis workshop.Methods:Before the workshop, participating communities were askedto develop research questions of interest regarding data collected aspart of CAHHM-FN and forward them to the coordinating team. Anagenda was created, circulated, and modified on the basis of com-munity feedback to plan the workshop. The CAHHM coordinating team, an  Indigenous  researcher,  and  a  non-Indigenous  biostatistician  plan-ned  the  workshop  to  strike  balance  among  Indigenous  protocols  forengagement,  theory  concerning  Indigenous  approaches  to  statisticalanalysis, and applied data analysis training.Results:Fifty participants and coordinating team members convenedfor the 3-day workshop (22 Indigenous and 28 non-Indigenous peoplefrom  communities,  professors,  trainees,  and  staff).  Topics  includedstatistical literacy, hands-on data analysis, data security, and topics inIndigenous  health  research.  Workshop  evaluations  indicated  a  highlevel of satisfaction and enthusiasm to hold similar future workshops.Conclusions:The Indigenous data workshop was designed to increasecapacity for data management and analysis by Indigenous communitypartners  and  develop  new  capacity  for  non-Indigenous  partners  andtrainees. It achieved this, with enthusiasm from Indigenous communitymembers to conduct future workshops.
